Let us press on and talk about functions.
Now, as Kim Kardashian says in this GIF
that you probably can't read, I'm just so
tired, I can't even function, which I'm
sure we've all related to at some point or
another, or maybe even right now.
And it makes sense that Kim is tired
when she's thinking about functions,
because if we said that values are things
in our JavaScript universe and
variables are pointers, two things,
then we could think about
functions as doing things.
And so
that is why they make us tired sometimes.
[LAUGH] So let's talk about functions.
Now we saw really briefly some
function declarations earlier.
But this is what it looks
like when we declare or
create a function in JavaScript.
There's a few different options that we
have for how to create a function but
this is one very common one.
We have the keyword function,
which indicates that this
is gonna be a function.
A name for the function,
in this case, half, and
then some parentheses with
some stuff inside them.
Then we have our good friends,
the curly braces.
And then we have some code
inside of those curly braces.
And in this case, we have one line of
code and it has the word return in it.
And then it has some kind of expression,
in this case,
dividing x by 2, so we might expect
half to give us the half of some number.
And if we wanna use it or
as we say in computer lingo,
as we if we wanna call a function,
we can say the name of the function,
and then parentheses.
And then pass in a value that we
want to give to this function for
it to run through its code
as whatever value we put
inside of the parens when
we declared the function.
So in this case,
if we assign a new variable
one to the value of calling half on 2,
the function half is gonna
get the number 2 and
it's going to return 2 divided
by 2 which is 1, cool?
Okay, so let's talk a little bit
more detail about what is going
on here inside of these parens
when we declare the function.
So the stuff that we put in here,
which right now has very
boring names of x or x and y,
these are what we could think
of as the values that this
function is gonna need to work.
And then when we call it,
we're gonna pass in actual
values that we want this
function to work with.
And so the difference between these
words is essentially that when we're
declaring the function and we're saying
okay, this function is gonna need an x and
it's gonna need a y, we call those
the parameters of the function.
And then when we pass in
actual values like 2 and 3,
those are called the arguments passed
to the function, which are gonna
get assigned to the parameters that we
described when we created the function.
So you could think of these parameters or
what happens in this x,
y here as sort of like mini-variables or
sort of pseudo-variables are what
we are gonna call the values that get
passed in as arguments to the function.
This is all just a little bit of
terminology, the words are not so
important except insofar as you're going
along in your JavaScript journey and
you're finding more resources, more
courses, more articles on MDN, whatever,
you might hear these words used.
Okay, now some functions don't even need
any values to do their job, like for
example, here we have a function
getRandomNumber and it's using,
you remember our Math.random
method that we looked at before?
Does anybody remember
what Math.random does?
>> Random number.
>> A random number, specifically?
>> Zero, one.
>> Between zero and one, yes, exactly.
So right now, we have a getRandomNumber
function which is really
just kind of a tiny little wrapper
around our Math.random method,
which is going to give us a new number.
And just like Math.random,
we don't need to give this function
any values to do its job, it's just
gonna generate a new number for us.
So in this case,
our function has no parameters.
In between these parentheses when we
declare the function, there's nothing.
And when we call the function,
we put nothing between the parentheses.
So yes, so these parameters are the inputs
that our function expects, and
the arguments that we pass
in are the actual values.
So let's take a look at this example.
I have a function here add3,
which is going to take in three
different parameters with the very
boring names x, y, and z.
And then it is going to log two things,
it's going to log the names
of the parameters, and it's going to
log the values of the actual arguments.
Note the difference in syntax here
between these two calls to console.log.
So fun fact about console.log
is you can call console.log and
pass in multiple arguments to console.log
using commas to separate them,
and it will log them all
separated by spaces.
Let's watch it in action.
So this is gonna log the parameter
names and then the values and
then it's going to return a sum,
we'll talk about returns in a second.
Let's go back to our, Console.
And we're going to declare
this function add3.
So now, what JavaScript has done is
it's created a new variable add3 whose
value is a function.
So if I asked for add3 with no
parentheses, JavaScript is gonna say,
yep, I know what add3 is,
and it's a function.
Now, if I call add3 and capture that
as a sum value, add3 is going to log out.
My parameters are names x, y, z, and
I received the arguments 4, 5, and 6.
And then the value of sum gonna be what?
What do y'all think?
[LAUGH]
>> 15.
>> Indeed, so
what add3 did was a few different things.
It logged a couple of things to
the console and it returned a value,
which then I was able to capture
by assigning it to a variable.
So we name parameters similarly
to how we name variables.
So we should kinda follow the same
rules of thumb as we do when we're
naming variables.
What do you think happens if
I do the first thing here?
This function, does this work where
in between the parentheses when I'm
declaring this function, I'm putting
a literal string value, literally a value?
Should we find out what happens?
>> It should work, no?
>> Guesses?
>> I think you should be able to pass
a string as a parameter into a function.
>> So we have some people saying
I think so, I think it'll work.
Some people saying I
don't think it'll work.
>> In chat, true.
>> Let's find out, sorry?
>> In chat, somebody said true.
>> Okay, so it will output true,
let's find out.
So does this work?
Ugh, JavaScript returned a syntax error,
true, we should say,
a syntax error, missing parameter.
So JavaScript is actually looking for
variable names in between those
parentheses when we declare a function.
So if I try to give in an actual
value there instead of the name for
a value that might get passed in
as a argument to the function,
JavaScript doesn't like it,
so this does not work.
Okay, how about this?
[LAUGH] How about if I have
a variable that starts with a 1 or
a parameter name that starts with a 1 and
ends with an exclamation point?
Do you think this will work?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah?
So we talked briefly about variable
names earlier in the course,
is this a valid variable name?
>> No.
>> No, it's not.
So let's see what JavaScript does.
Let's see if it likes it.
Oop, nope, this time,
the error is even weirder, identifier
starts immediately after numeric literal.
It's cuz it can't even parse
this as a name for a parameter.
It's actually seeing the 1 and
thinking it's a literal 1, and
then it's confused about what happens
afterwards, and so no, this doesn't work.
So essentially, when you're declaring
a function, put valid variable names as
the names of any parameters that you
might need for that function, cool?
Okay, now,
another question we might have is like for
example, add3, as its name indicates,
expects three values coming in because
it's trying to add x to y to z.
So what happens if we don't call
a function with its intended arguments?
What happens if we call add3
with just 1 and 2, for example?
Any guesses?
>> Node reference.
>> So node reference, meaning we
get something like an unexpected
missing value in JavaScript we might say,
okay?
So maybe we get like,
nope, something's wrong.
I was expecting x, y, and z and
you didn't give me a z, and
it's not gonna work, okay?
Any other guesses what might happen?
>> In chat,
a couple of people are saying an error.
>> An error might happen, yes, so
that's basically more generally.
Let's find out.
[LAUGH] Well, we didn't get an error.
The function ran and it said,
I received the arguments 1 2,
and our good friend undefined.
So JavaScript didn't mind that we called
this with the wrong number of arguments,
it just said, well,
you didn't pass in a z.
z is undefined then.
And so the value of adding, what was it,
1 + 2 + undefined is N-A-N or NaN,
which stands for, anybody know?
>> Not a number.
>> Not a number,
which ironically, Is a number.
[LAUGH] So NaN is something you might find
if things have gone wrong in your program.
It's also what we get,
like let's say if we try to divide by 0 or
something like that, when the math just
doesn't work out, like adding 1 and 2 and
undefined, JavaScript's like
I don't know how to do that.
But it doesn't error, it doesn't complain,
it just returns a value that I wouldn't
expect because of that undefined value.
So this is, again, a case of
JavaScript being super loosey-goosey
with its types and with the things that
it expects and basically not caring
that you essentially silently passed
in undefined as the third value.
Now what about our
getRandomNumber function, which,
let me just go back and
grab it so that we have it.
So we had this getRandomNumber function,
which returns our Math.random and
if we call it,
we expect some kind of
number between 0 and 1.
But what happens if we call it with some
value that we didn't account for
in the function declaration?
>> It sort of turns optimus quick.
>> Also maybe spoilers [LAUGH].
So yes, spoilers is JavaScript don't care,
we gave it an extra
value that it didn't have to pay
attention to and so it just ignored it.
No error, no hey,
are you using this function the way that
you expect to be using this function?
Dear programmer,
maybe you've misunderstood something
about how you wrote that function.
No helpful thing like
that from JavaScript, no.
Instead, it's just gonna go ahead and
do its job,
ignoring the useless value that we passed
in, that we didn't capture as a parameter.
So point being JavaScript is
very loosey-goosey when it comes
to function arguments,
unlike some other languages,
which will error or complain or
at least warn you or
say something when you've passed in
an unexpected number of arguments.
Now, there are things that you as a
programmer can do within your function to
make sure that anybody calling that
function is using the correct number of
arguments.
But we're gonna leave that for
next steps in the JavaScript journey.
But suffice it to say it's left up to the
coder to handle any mistakes like thiscuz
JavaScript itself is not gonna do it for
you.
So, yes, it's sort of almost like you
pass in no arguments and it's just like,
well, I have no arguments,
to you not having any arguments.
I don't mind, it's fine,
it's loosey-goosey.